Notes for "Untitled" Series of Pieces for Solo Piano
Nathan Bibb

April 4, 2009

This is a brief introductory note on my series of Untitled Piano pieces.  After finishing the music for the Catangay's production of the play "Square One" in 2005, I went through a musical slump of sorts.  I had no other commissions, money was tight, I was focusing on my day job, and we had our second child - which involves an exponetial increase in work.

In April 2006 (3 years ago!) I started a piece for solo piano based on a two note measure I was playing with at the time.  Over the course of the next couple of years I had 3 false starts with piano pieces that just didn't go anywhere for some reason.  These were named Piano 1, Piano 2, and Piano 3, and are actually still around, unfinished.  I had originally envisioned these pieces to be about 20 minutes a piece, but I think that was too long for me.  I really wanted to create something in the form of Morton Feldman's longer solo piano pieces.

In December 2008 I had been looking at Jackson Pollack's paintings online - they were all Untitled, and there was something about them I couldn't quite pin down - an immediacy, the look of randomness, but with some underlying form that seems just out of reach.  On the evening of December 11, 2008 I started Untitled No. 1, writing straight into Lilypond all on one staff - I am focusing on the sounds instead of the notation, and I plan to go back and adjust for printing later.

April 6, 2009

To continue this line of thought - one of the things I saw in Pollack's paintings that I was trying to get at was this immediacy of the art.  By this, I do not mean the effect on the audience, but the immediacy in the act of creation.  In conventional painting, one can belabor a given scene, object, or stroke - painting over the original, trying o get it "just right".  But in Pollock's painings, you get the sense that during the creation, as the paint was dripping onto the canvas, the act of art was immediate - he had no time to belabor his subject, it was there for better or for worse. That was what I was trying to do with my piano pieces - immediatel write, for better or worse, and continue to move forward.  I kind of get the impression that this is what Feldman was doing.  This is why he always wrote in ink, never in pencil.  Once it was down, it was done.

April 30, 2009

As I belabor Untitled 4, overwriting and doing exactly what I rail against above, I suppose it is a good time to re-read these notes and get back to what I was trying to start.

I would like to make one additional note to the comment from 4/6 above, though.  While there does seem to be this immediacy in the creation of art in both Pollack and Feldman, I would like to stress that this does not mean that the art is created in a haphazard fashion.  While the creation itself is immediate I suspect the Feldman and Pollack both spent a great deal of time "pre-creation" getting in touch with their materials and preparing mentally for this immediate creation.  With Feldman, I know that he spent hours and hours on the paino going through the material - I have heard this from Bunita Marcus herself - and Feldman called the piano "his Walden".  I am sure that Pollack too got very closely in touch with his material.  This, in fact, seems to be much of the point of his work.

So the question for me, then, is how I get in touch with my material when I am writing into a command line text editor.  I do not have the luxury of playing piano very often - I should probably make time to play guitar regularly again.  For these pieces the process I have gone through is to listen to what I have done so far while I am at work or in the car, or walking or just sitting.  This has helped me digest the material I am creating as I create it.  I am not sure what impact this will have on the final outcome, though.

Now to start fresh on Untitled 4...
